Coronary heart disease is considered to be one of the most lethal conditions, causing millions of deaths every year. Several machine learning techniques have been widely applied to uncover the risk factors, which are generally believed to be behavioural. However, the results from these studies cannot be generalized since they are strongly dependent on the dataset characteristics (e.g., sample size, features, or geographical location). Moreover, no study has been carried out on multiple datasets, which tend to be diverse both genetically and behaviorally. As a consequence, to allow a generalization of the current studies in the discipline, a thorough interpretation of the machine learning algorithms’ performance and feature explainability using multiple datasets is required. Here, we investigate the feature impact on the risk of coronary heart disease using a comparative and explainable approach across two different datasets. To achieve this, two diverse coronary disease datasets were selected and used as a training set (Framingham) and a test set (Cleveland). Four machine learning classifiers were applied to predict the risk of coronary heart disease using a five-fold cross-validation tuning approach for hyperparameter optimization on the training set. The four algorithms were deployed using the common features shared by the Cleveland and the Framingham datasets. The most accurate algorithm was further investigated by using Shapley Additive Explanations (SHAP) values to identify the features’ impact on the predictive model, regardless of the dataset characteristic. Logistic 
